Jef Poskanzer (jef@acme.com) invented the PBM format in the 1980s to
provide the computer graphics world with a common, trouble-free
format, a lingua-franca, for bitmaps.  The format was designed to be
simple enough that it could transmitted within an email message
without any special encapsulating and survive any translations and
recoding that an email message might go through and be easily
extractable on the other end.

In 1988, Jef distributed the forerunner of Netpbm, Pbmplus, which
gathered together the various tools he had developed to work with PBM
files.  These were mainly tools to convert between PBM and other
existing graphics formats, making it possible to deal with the Tower
Of Babel situation that had arisen with the proliferation of graphics
formats.

By the end of 1988, Jef had added the PGM and PPM formats and lots more
tools to Pbmplus.

In 1991, Jef added a variety of programs and code contributed by the
user community, and then stopped maintaining Pbmplus.  Jef never
formally renounced support for it, but simply didn't get around to
distributing any updates for over a year.

In 1993, Netpbm was developed to replace Pbmplus.  Netpbm was nothing
more than a new release of Pbmplus, and named for the fact that people
all over the world would maintain the package by submitting fixes and
enhancements over the Net.  This was a time when such worldwide
collaboration was still novel.

Then Netpbm apparently fell into neglect with the last release by its
regular maintainer in March 1994.  In September of 1995 Anthony
Thyssen released an unofficial update of it called Netpbm-1mar1994.p1,
while disclaiming any responsibity for ongoing upkeep.

The documentation in that 1995 release mentioned two different official
mailing lists concerning the package, but by April 1999, neither
existed anymore.

In September 1999, Bryan Henderson needed some minor bugs fixed, and
wanted to clean up the mess of unsupported versions and outdated
documentation of these tools.  After checking around to see if anyone
had any claims of ownership of the package, and finding none, Bryan
assumed control and responsibility for Netpbm.  

In November 1999, Thorbjoern Ravn Anderson <ravn@mip.sdu.dk> did the
same thing, for the same reason (apparently unaware of Bryan's work)
and made available an updated version (based on the 1994 release) as
described by http://sunsite.auc.dk/netpbm.  Shortly thereafter, he
discontinued his effort in deference to the new Pbmplus effort
mentioned below.  Bryan did not know about Anderson's work until March
2000.

In parallel, and unknown to Bryan, Jef was working on a new release
under the original name Pbmplus and claiming again (or maybe still) to
be maintaining Pbmplus.  He did a limited release of a beta version of
it in November 1999.  A mailing list pbmplus@acme.com was active.
Bryan learned of this effort's existence in March 2000.

Pbmplus and Netpbm were once part of the body of X/Windows contributed
software, distributed on ftp.x.org (directory contrib/utilities).
Bryan didn't receive a response to an inquiry to the ftp.x.org owner
as to the prospect of cleaning up the Netpbm related files there.  So
Bryan instead made Metalab the new home of the source code.  But
Metalab had pretty low quality too, and in April 2000 Bryan moved the
package's home to Sourceforge.

In 2003, Debian created an own upstream with security and freedom in mind;
Andreas Barth started to maintain this for Debian.



CHANGE HISTORY 
--------------

04.01.16 ABa

added st4topgm. Thanks to Justin Pryzby <justinpryzby@users.sourceforge.net>

winicontoppm can now handle 24/32 bpp. Thanks to Lee Benfield <lee@benf.org>.

Fixed bug in pnmnorm with too large values. Thanks to Adam M. Costello"
  <bug.amc+1@nicemice.net> #129452

Fixed bug in ppmtobpm with invalid bpp-values. Thanks to
  YAMASHITA Junji <ysjj@unixuser.org> #227125

04.01.04 ABa

Export now pm_canonstr, pm_openColornameFile, pm_colorget, pm_rgbnorm,
  pnm_scalesample, pnm_setpamrow and pam_colorname.

Add pamstack. [BH]

Add pbmtextps.  Thanks James McCann <jmccann@eskimo.com>.

pnmtotiff: Add -indexbits option to allow fewer than 8 bits
  per sample in apletted image.  Thanks Thomas Henlich
  <Thomas.Henlich@imm.tu-dresden.de>.

pnmtotiff: put zeroes in unused colormap entries.
  Thanks Thomas Henlich <Thomas.Henlich@imm.tu-dresden.de>.

pbmtext:  Add -lspace option.  Thanks Denis <denism@cyberus.ca>

pnmtops: remove setpagedevice by default.  Add -setpage option. [BH]

pstopnm: Add a showpage in case the EPS source doesn't have it.
  Thanks "J. Milgram" <milgram@cgpp.com>.

pstopnm: Run Ghostscript directly instead of via a shell.
  Some Windows environments don't have a Bourne-compatible shell. [BH]

pnmtotiff: Don't put bogus colormap in grayscale TIFF.
  Thanks Thomas Henlich <Thomas.Henlich@imm.tu-dresden.de>.

replaced optParseOptions* by their (existing) pm_*-counterparts.
  Thanks to Brendan O'Dea for the discussion on IRC

picttoppm, ppmtompeg: fix bug with invalid parameter
  ("b" modes) on popen(). [BH]

pnmtopng: fix bug with 'mayscale'. [BH]

pnmnorm: Fix bug with bvalue == 0.
  Thanks "Blake, Chris" <chris.blake@windriver.com>

pnmtopng: restructure palette generation to make it easier to read. [BH]

03.12.06 ABa

  ppmtompeg: progress indicator is sent so that non-ttys could use it. #218295

03.11.25 ABa

  Revisited the the security fixes, and replaced some with "nicer" code.

03.11.10 ABa

  Fixed more tmpfile-problems in ppmtompeg and others.

03.11.04 ABa

  Repaired pamstretch-gen.

03.11.04 ABa

  Fixed insecure tmpfile-handling in anytopnm, pnminterp-gen
  and others. (#219019)

03.10.04 ABa

  Fixed bug in pnmnorm (#213366) at taking maximums for brightness.

03.09.18 ABa
              Fixed libary build scripts

              Added build target "build-env"

              Put a "die" in the configure-script as warning

03.08.31 ABa
              Added a README.Non-Debian.

              Total rewrite of the make file system:
              Most of the logic is now in the GNUmakefile and a perl helper

              Unified the libraries again, but you can also get the old ones.

              Seperated build space for static and shared libs, so you can
              build both in parallel.


02.03.15 BJH  Release 9.25

              Add pamdice.
         
              pnmgamma: add -srgbramp.

              ppmnorm, pgmnorm: replace with pnmnorm

              ppmnorm: Read only a row at a time into memory.
         
              ppmnorm: Add -keephues option.

              Pnmtotiff: Add -miniswhite option.

              Pnmtopsnr: Read only a row at a time into memory.

              Convert bmptoppm to bmptopnm.

              ppmtopcx: Add -xpos, -ypos options.

              pcxtoppm: Don't require seekable input.

              pcxtoppm: Improve messages; add some PCX header validation.

              ppmtowinicon: Use standard alpha mask (PGM image) instead of
              PPM image (black/not black) for and file.

              pnmpad: Add -width, -height, -halign, -valign options.
              Thanks M. van Beilen <mvb@iradis.org>.

              ppmhist: remove 100,000 color limit.

              pnmnlfilt: works with multi-image streams.  Thanks 
              "Steven M. Schultz" <sms@2BSD.COM>.

              pcxtoppm: Fix bug with negative image position.

              pnmtopsnr: fix unsigned integer bug giving wrong results on PGMs.

              libpnm: fix bug: PAM functions write 16 bit samples wrong.

              Tifftopnm: fix bug: transparency mask all wrong.  Thanks
              Heikki Suonsivu <hsu@bbnetworks.net>.

              Makefile improvements for cross compiling.  Thanks
              "Maciej W. Rozycki" <macro@ds2.pg.gda.pl>.
 
              Allow build with existing JBIG library instead of the
              bundled one.  Thanks "Maciej W. Rozycki"
              <macro@ds2.pg.gda.pl>.

              ppmtompeg Makefile: include -R option where needed.
              Thanks Hans Werner Strube <strube@physik3.gwdg.de>.

              Add BSD/OS to configure program.  
              Thanks seebs@plethora.net (Peter Seebach)

              configure: Fix missing newline bug for IRIX.

02.01.27 BJH  Release 9.24

              Add ppmsvgalib.
              
              pnmremap: Use full color resolution of input instead of that
              of color map to do Floyd-Steinberg dithering.
         
              pnmremap: fix bug where Floyd-Steinberg dithering of very 
              dark areas creates spots of maximal brightness.

              ppmquant: fix same bug as pnmremap.

              pnmscale: add -nomix option

              rawtopgm: fix bug.  Thanks Joe Krahn <krahn@niehs.nih.gov>.
              
              pnmquant: replace with a Perl program that calls
              pnmcolormap and pnmremap.

              Fix bug: PAM library routines fail to read 2-byte samples.
         
              fix bug: install-dev doesn't install mappam.h.

              configure sets up install paths.

              make install does Ldconfig where required.
         
              pnmtops: Add "XxY" form of -dpi option.  Thanks Vladimir 
              Nadvornik <nadvornik@suse.cz>

              ppmtomap: rewrite to call the new pnmcolormap.

              pnmscale: clean up code a little; now it appears to produce
              somewhat better results -- don't know why.

              exif.h: remove C++ comments

              various fixes to please Irix compiler.

              Change some "long" to "uint32n" so it works on 64 bit 
              machines.

02.01.04 BJH  Release 9.23

              tifftopnm: fix bug from 9.22: always crashes.

              xpmtoppm: fix bug from 9.21: XPM 3 files not recognized because
              /* XPM */ comment read twice.
                         
              xwdtopnm: Use bitmap_pad instead of bitmap_unit on X11 pixmap
              files with depth > 1.  Thanks "Ben Kelley" <ben_kelley@ubsw.com>.

              pnmtopalm: fix bug: crashes with -colormap and non-color input.

              ppmforge: fix bug: array subscripts out of bounds.  Thanks
              Rob Menke <robmenke@mac.com>.

              giftopnm: fix bug with extraneous "bogus character 0x00" message

              tifftopnm: add -respectfillorder option.  Ignore FILLORDER
              by default.

              make install-dev: install shared library stub files (symlinks).
              
              ppmtogif: Fix bug: color resolution in wrong bits in logical
              screen descriptor.  Thanks Elmue <elmue@gmx.de>.

              Add -lz to Tiff programs; libtiff requires it now.

              Add ppmcolors.

              Add pnmremap.

              Add pnmcolormap.

              pnmtops: Include setpagedevice directive in Postscript output.
              Thanks A Braunsdorf <ab@eas.purdue.edu>.

              pnmtops: turn-to-fit logic works properly where paper is 
              wider than tall.  Thanks A Braunsdorf <ab@eas.purdue.edu>.

              giftopnm: cleanup
         
01.12.10 BJH  Release 9.22

              Fix bug: pnm_luminosity_factor must be "extern" in pam.h

              pbmtonokia: can create picture messages.  -txt, -net options.

              tifftopnm: Accept invalid FILLORDER value - assume msb-to-lsb.

01.12.01 BJH  Release 9.21

              Add pamdeinterlace.

              Add pnmquant.

              pnmtops: Accept maxval > 255 input.
         
              Rename pnminterp to the more informative pnmstretch.

              pamstretch: add -xscale, -yscale options

              pbmtolj: Add -copies option

              ppmtogif: Add secret -h option to make Latex2html configure
              program work.

              ppmquant: output maxval controlled by colormap maxval,
              not input maxval.

              pbmclean: Add -black and -white options.  Thanks
              Michael Sternberg <sternberg@phys.uni-paderborn.de>.

              xpmtoppm: Don't require input to start with a comment.
              Thanks MINAMI <minami@chem.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

              xpmtoppm: Fix bug introduced with 9.20 with XPM 1 files.

              pnmcut, pamcut: fix bug with cut that begins past right edge
              of image.
         
              pamcut: Same fix as in pnmcut in 9.9.  Also fix black fill.  

              pnmtotiff:  Process one row at a time instead of reading
              entire image into memory.

              pnmstretch: convert from pnm to pam - pamstretch.

01.10.05 BJH  Release 9.20

              ppmtogif: Add -nolzw option.

              ppmntsc: do multiple images

              pnmtojpeg: fix bug from 9.19 causing crash on most images.

              ilbmtoppm: Correct cmyk -> rgb transformation.

              ppmtompeg: Fix bug due to missing "breaks".  Thanks
              Wolfgang Mueller <muellerw@pc7143.unige.ch>    

              eyuvtoppm: fix memory leak, speed up by allocating working
              storage only once.

              libopt.c: replace strtok_r() with strtok() so it compiles on
              Mac OS X.
         
01.09.18 BJH  Release 9.19

              pnmtotiff: fix bug from 9.17 causing compile to fail
              with old Tiff library

              pnmtojpeg: Add -exif option.

              ppmtojpeg: Change to pnmtojpeg; PBM/PGM input causes grayscale
              output.

              pnmtotiff: Handle LSB2MSB FILLORDER.

              pnmtotiff: Fix -msb2lsb, -lsb2msb.  Used to do nothing but 
              set FILLORDER tag value.

              Make maxval of a PBM image read as a PGM image 255 instead of 1.
              
              libpbm: eliminate external data symbol pm_show_version
              so it works with Windows.

              Use subplatform-specific prefixes on Windows shared libraries.
              Thanks Charles Wilson <cwilson@ece.gatech.edu>.

01.09.04 BJH  Release 9.18

              Fix bug from 9.17: -lm now needed in jpegtopnm link.

              jpegtopnm: Add -dumpexif and -exif options.

              pnmtotiff: Fix bug: 16 bit samples byte-swapped on little-
              endian machines.

              Remove C++ comments from exif.c

01.09.03 BJH  Release 9.17

              Add ppmtoneo, neotoppm.  Thanks Teemu Hukkanen <tjhukkan@iki.fi>.

              pnmtotiff:  Add -flate, -adobeflate.  Thanks Peter Creath.

              pnmindex: Fix bug with -size option.  Thanks 
              André Majorel <amajorel@teaser.fr>

              pnmflip: Fix memory leak, plus make special case for PBM
              images that uses 12 times less memory.  Thanks
              Stefan Roellin <stefan.roellin@switzerland.org>.
          
              tifftopnm: Fix incorrect interpretation of FILLORDER tag
              causing incorrect output with 16 bit samples and
              FILLORDER not msb2lsb.  Thanks Don Reid
              <donr@cvs.agilent.com>.

              tifftopnm: Fix PHOTOMETRIC_MIN_IS_WHITE case.
              Thanks Don Reid <donr@cvs.agilent.com>.

              giftopnm: Fix bug with malformed GIFs that end prematurely.

              pbmtonokia: Convert C++ style comments to C style so Sun C
              compiler can handle them.  Thanks Jon Parise <jon@csh.rit.edu>.

              Install development package (header files, static libraries)
              by default.  Add ability to build both static and shared
              libraries.

              Add merge/nonmerge to Makefile.config/configure, in place
              of special make targets.

              Fix Mac OSX build for gcc 3.0.  Thanks m-sekino@mb.kcom.ne.jp 
              (Masanori Sekino)

              Fix make install.hdr.  Thanks m-sekino@mb.kcom.ne.jp 
              (Masanori Sekino)

01.07.24 BJH  Release 9.16

              Builds on Darwin/Mac OS.  Thanks m-sekino@mb.kcom.ne.jp 
              (Masanori Sekino)

              Add pbmtopsg3.  (Postscript G3 fax) Thanks Kristof Koehler 
              <kristof@fachschaft.physik.uni-karlsruhe.de>

              Add pbmtonokia.  Thanks Tim.Ruehsen@OpenMediaSystem.de.

              Add ppmrainbow.  Thanks Arjen Bax <arjen.bax@cmg.nl>.

              Add pamoil, as replacement for pgmoil.  Based on ppmoil by
              Chris <cesheppa@midnightsun.uwaterloo.ca>.

              ppmtogif:  Add -alpha option.

              ppmtojpeg: fix bug: option takes as input filename.

              xpmtoppm: fix bug: Bogus EOF failure.  Thanks 
              "Dr. Larry Pyeatt" <pyeatt@redwood.cs.ttu.edu>.
              
              pnmtopng/pngtopnm: update to Release 2.37.5 of the Pnmtopng
              package.  Make -transparent option work like Pnmtogif --
              you can add an "=" before the color to specify "exact".
              fix bug with background color and maxval = 65535.  Fix a 
              raft of bugs in pnmtopng from Netpbm 9.15.

              Remove Tiff library from the package.

              Proper naming of AIX and HP-UX shared libraries.

              giftopnm: Add color index to transparency message.

              Add some -R link options in make files.

              ppm3d: fix bug: ignores offset argument.

              tifftopnm: fix bug: shifted right one pixel.
         
              pnmshear: remove sscanf so it works better with Cygwin,
              convert to shhopt, clean up.

              pgmcrater: Remove black vertical line at right
              edge. Make craters wrap around the image (enables tiling
              of image).  Thanks Arjen Bax.
              
              pgmtopbm: remove sscanf so it works better with Cygwin.
              Thanks Arjen Bax.

              Treat all white space, including DOS carriage returns,    
              in color name db file as white space;  Thanks Arjen Bax.

01.06.24 BJH  Release 9.15

              Change format specs to state that sample values are
              nonlinear instead of linear.

              pnmtopalm/palmtopnm: Handle PalmOS 4.0 16 bit direct
              color format.  Thanks  Bill Janssen  <janssen@parc.xerox.com>.

              pnmgamma: Add CIE Rec 709 gamma correction option.

              pnmgamma: Add -ungamma option
              
              ppmcie: Add -rec709 color system option as default so
              that it produces true PPM output (per the new spec) and
              carefully document what the program generates.
              
              ppmcie (work done by Andrew Hamilton
              <Andrew.Hamilton@colorado.edu> in May 1999 but not
              distributed):

                 1. Corrected the XYZ -> RGB transformation;
                 2. Eliminated the -interpwp option, a fudge which had been
                    necessitated by the incorrect XYZ -> RGB transformation;
                 3. Added a Gamma correction, missing in the original;
                 4. Added the option to plot u' v' chromaticity instead of x y;
                 5. Added options to suppress labels and/or axes.

              pnmscale, pnmscalefixed:  Fix bug with unwanted -verbose
              behavior.

              pnmscale, pnmscalefixed: Add -reduce option.  Thanks
              Christopher W. Boyd <cboyd@pobox.com>

              ppmtoeyuv: Speed up by not freeing/reallocating storage for
              each image.  Thanks "Steven M. Schultz" <sms@moe.2bsd.com>

              ppmtoeyuv: Fix memory leak.

              Eliminate pgm_pbmmaxval, ppm_pbmmaxval, and pnm_pbmmaxval
              from libpgm, libppm, and libpnm.  'maxval' argument to 
              pgm_readpgmrow() and ppm_readppmrow() already accomplishes
              this.  pnm_readpnmrow() changed to do same.  external data
              symbols like this do not work with Mingw.
         
              various changes to accomodate Mingw (native Windows)
              and DLLs with Cygwin (Windows).

              eyuvtoppm: rewrite.  Uses Netpbm libraries now.

              pstopnm: Remove gratuitous 5% margin.  Add -equalpixels,
              -imageheight, and -imagewidth options.

              pnmtopng: Read only one row at a time, not the whole image,
              into memory.  Do multiple passes through the (hopefully
              fully cached) file.  This saves memory because pnmtopng's
              internal format may use 96 times as much space per pixel 
              as the file.

              libpbm: Add pm_openr_seekable(), pm_seek(), pm_tell().

              libppm: Add ppm_computecolorhash2(), ppm_computecolorhist2().

              configure: fix bug with Solaris/Sun compiler.

              Split pbmplus.h into pm_config.h and pbm/pm.h to prepare
              for automatic generation of pm_config.h.  Move pm_*()
              subroutines from libpbm1.c to new libpm.c for clarity.

              Remove malloc.h from 411toppm.  malloc is included by
              pm_config.h, in platform-dependent way.

01.05.13 BJH  Release 9.14

              fix bug in shhopt causing wild branches.

              winicontoppm: Make alpha mask ("and") output PBM instead
              of PPM; correct sense so white is opaque, black transparent.

              ppmtoxpm: Add --alphamask option.  Remove 256 color limit.
         
              xpmtoppm: Add --alphaout option
         
              ppmtogif: Add "=" to -transparent option to specify exact
              color.

              configure: change /bin/perl to /usr/bin/perl.  Red Hat Linux
              doesn't have /bin/perl.

              pnm/Makefile: correct bugs in link.  Thanks J Scott Berg 
              <jsberg@bnl.gov>

              Make it build on Unixware.

              Make it build on OpenBSD.

              document color indexing and histogram functions.

01.04.22 BJH  Release 9.13

              ppmtogif: fix divide by zero

              move much of README file into a new master man page, netpbm.1.

              pnmcomp: add -align and -valign options.
              
              Add thinkjettopbm.  Thanks Eric Norum <eric.norum@usask.ca>.

              Builds with Sun compiler.

01.03.25 BJH  Release 9.12

              Add 411toppm.  Thanks Steve Allen <sla@alumni.caltech.edu>.

              pnmcrop:  add -sides option (does what was default
              behavior until July 2000)

              ppmtoeyuv: Use netpbm libraries, deal with multi-image
              input.

              Add color row color map and Floyd-Steinberg functions from
              ilbm package to libppm.

              ilbmtoppm, ppmtoilbm: replace with Ingo Wilken's version from
              April 13, 1995.

              jpegtopnm: fix crash with B&W JPEG input.

              pnmcomp: fix bug: invalid output image when overlay image
              is "higher" format than underlying image.

              ppmchange: fix bug: wouldn't work with maxval != 255.

              pnmtojbig: fix bug: it always says invalid maxval. 
              Thanks Bill Davidsen.

              pbmtext: fix bug: output is sometimes "not implemented"
              because of uninitialized variable.

              pnmpsnr: rewritten so as not to use Fiasco library.
              Correctly handles maxval != 255.  Works with PAM.

              Add IRIX to the configure program.  Thanks Neil Franklin 
              <franklin@arch.ethz.ch>.

              make files: add ZLIB_DIR and ZHDR_DIR variables to
              Makefile.config.  Thanks Bill Janssen.  
              <janssen@parc.xerox.com>

              pcdindex: convert from csh to sh.  Thanks Steve McIntyre.

01.02.20 BJH  Release 9.11

              pnmtopalm: Handle 16 bit direct color format.

              pnmtotiff: Add -xresolution and -yresolution options.
              Thanks Tim Ruehsen.

              Add error message to GNUMakefile for when GNU Make is too old.

              pnmpsnr: fix bug: PGM files always compared equal.

              libpbm: improve --version to reflect that libraries are
              usually dynamically linked now, so it's the version of
              libpbm, not the program itself.

              pbmtext: add -space option.

              asciitopgm: fix crash due to memcpy that should be memset.
              Thanks Philipp Knirsch <pknirsch@redhat.com>.

              pktopbm: fix numerous bugs.  Copied from Red Hat.  By
              jcn <janneke@gnu.org> 1998.09.22.

              pstopnm.csh: fix bomb when xres=yres.  This program is
              obsolete (use pstopnm.c instead), but the patch was free,
              so why not?  Copied from Red Hat.  By Nalin Dahyabhai
              <nalin@redhat.com> 2000.02.14.

              pnmtotiff: Make photometric for G3/G4 fax MINISWHITE 
              instead of MINISBLACK.  Add -minisblack option.  Thanks
              Eric Smith <eric@brouhaha.com>.

              libppm/ppm_parsecolor: fix rounding error for very small
              maxvals (e.g. PBM files -- maxval = 1).
         
              pnmtopalm, palmtopnm: minor updates
              
              bmptoppm: handle BMPs that use ColorsUsed instead of
              bits per pixel to determine color map size.

              bmptoppm: add -verbose option.

              ppmquant: fix bug with maxval > 255 causing arithmetic
              overflow and arbitrary colors in output.

01.01.10 BJH  Release 9.10

              giftopnm: add -alphaout.

              ppmchange: Add -remainder option.

              Add pnmtopalm, palmtopnm.  Thanks Bill Janssen 
              <bill@janssen.org>.

              Add pnmmontage.  Thanks Ben Olmstead <bem@mad.scientist.com>.

              ppmtogif: Add -comment option.

              ppmtogif: fix bug: created GIF89 when it should have created
              GIF87.

              giftopnm: fix bug in displaying of comment extensions.

              jpegtopnm: Add -comments option.

              ppmtojpeg: Add -comment option.

              ppmtompeg: fix crash.  Thanks  Roger Southwick 
              <rogers@mediaforte.com>

              More work on separating source and build directories.
              GNU Make 3.77 or better now required.

00.11.20 BJH  Release 9.9

              add ppmtolj: color HP Laserjet graphics (PCL).  Thanks
              Jonathan.Melvin@heywood.co.uk.

              ppmfade: add -mix option.

              ppmhist: add -noheader option.

              rawtopgm: Add --bpp, --maxval, and --littleendian options.

              pnmindex: Add -noquant, -title options.

              pnmtotiff: create 16 bits-per-sample Tiff files when 
              maxval > 255 instead of crash.

              tifftopnm: handle 16 bits-per-sample Tiff files.

              pnmscale: Use floating point arithmetic instead of 12 bit
              fixed point to reduce distortion at right and bottom edge of
              large images with weird scaling factors.  Add pnmscalefixed,
              which is the old fixed point pnmscale, which goes faster.  But
              also fix bug in the fixed point version so the distortion 
              isn't as bad.  Add -verbose option.

              pnmcut: fix bug: right edge wrong or subscript out of bounds.
              Thanks MURAKAMI Masahiko <muramasa@np.catv.ne.jp>,
              Sven Over <sven.over@web.de>, Frederic Vivien 
              <vivien@lcs.mit.edu>, Pete Weisz <pete@pw34.resnet.cornell.edu>.

              xpmtoppm: fix reading of 4-character color codes; handles
              "NONE" color (transparent background); add -v.  Thanks
              Martin Vermeer <martin.vermeer@hut.fi>.

              ppm/Makefile: fix bug: ppmtompeg, hpcdtoppm not installed.
              Thanks Mike Castle <dalgoda@ix.netcom.com>.

              ppmpspread: fix bug: invalid memory reference crash.  Thanks
              digger <jfk666@poczta.onet.pl>, john joseph iii casey 
              <jjcasey@midway.uchicago.edu>.

              ppmchange: fix bug: every other argument pair ignored.
              Thanks Sven Over <sven.over@web.de>.

              Fix error message in pXmmerge (no pm_error()).  Thanks
              Pete Weisz <pete@pw34.resnet.cornell.edu>, 
              <g031w503@soft.iwate-pu.ac.jp>

              libppm: add /usr/X11R6/lib/X11/rgb.txt as default rgb.txt file.
              Thanks ceder@lysator.liu.se (Per Cederqvist).

              Replace hpcdtoppm version 0.3 (1992) with 0.6 (1994).  Add
              pcdindex.

              Build fixes for Tru64.  Thanks Phil Benchoff <benchoff@vt.edu>.

              Makefile.config: option to not strip binaries on install.

00.09.01 BJH  Release 9.8

              jpegtopnm: Add -adobe, -notadobe options.

              ppmchange:  Add -closeness.

              giftopnm: report transparency information.

              jpegtopnm: Accept single-hyphen options.

              Make it build on DJGPP.

00.08.12 BJH  Release 9.7

              sgitopnm: add -channel option to access more than 3 channels.
              Thanks Smarasderagd.
         
              pnmcut: Add -pad option

              ppmtobmp: change default from -os2 to -windows.

              pnmcut: fix bug: height argument misinterpreted.

              ppmquantall: fix bug: don't crop white borders off images

              yuvtoppm: fix bugs: don't depend on bigendian representation
              of integers.  reject odd-width images.

              ppmtoyuv: fix bug: reject odd-width images.

              anytopnm: fix bug: required nonstandard shell feature.

              giftopnm: fix bug: when image consists of two gray colors,
              program converted them to black or white and created PBM
              file.  Thanks Smarasderagd.  Also fix memory leak.

              Make changes since 9.2 build on Cygwin.

00.07.12 BJH  Release 9.6

              Add pnmtofiasco, fiascotopnm, psnpsnr.  Thanks to Ullrich
              Hafner.

              Make Pnmcrop use a temporary file instead of huge amounts
              of memory.

              bmptoppm: fix crash when OS/2 BMP file has > 8 bits per pixel.

              anytopnm: fix bug (from 9.0) wherein program almost
              always crashed.  Add gzip, bzip, bzip2 capability.
              Thanks Charles Howes.

              parallel.c: Work around SunOS libc problem.

              Define some newer libtiff macros so it compiles against
              older libtiff.

00.07.01 BJH  Release 9.5

              Extend formats to allow multiple images per file.  Add
              -allimages option to pnmfile.  Add pnmsplit.  Extend
              pnmtops.

              Add pbmtowbmp, wbmptopbm.  Thanks Terje Sannum.

              ppmtobmp: Add 24 bit (truecolor) capability.  Remove Release 8.3
              colormap size update.

              pnmcut: easier, more expressive syntax for specifying what
              to cut.

              pnminterp: handle maxval != 255, convert to use Netpbm
              libraries.

              Translate pstopnm from Csh to C, eliminate dependency
              on the 'bc' program.

              Fix bug in tiff library build which caused null soname.

              Add optParseopt2() to shhopt.a so you can use long options
              with one hyphen instead of two.

              giftopnm: fix bug with variable used before set.  Fix bug
              (coding error -- 0=>i).  Unknown impact.

              bmptoppm: fix bug with 24 bit (truecolor) Windows BMPs.

              xwdtopnm: fix one more bug with bits_per_item <> bits_per_pixel.

              Fix ppmtompeg build bug with static libraries.

              Make build clean with gcc -ansi (albeit with some files
              that need extensions declaring the _BSD_SOURCE etc.).

00.06.04 BJH  Release 9.4

              Rebase pnmtopng, pngtopnm on Pnmtopng 2.37.4.

              pbmtolj: fix bug where blank lines get discarded.  Thanks
              Charles Howes.

              ppmtompeg: fix bug with "PNM" format files with maxval != 255.
              Get rid of built-in PPM file parsing.

              Fix 'make install' where mkinstalldirs is not found.

              Fix bug where rle_global.c would not compile with GNU C 
              Library 2.

00.06.01 BJH  Release 9.3

              pnmfile: check for file size error.

              ppmhist: handle larger maxvals, image sizes

              xwdtopnm: Use color map with DirectColor to fix wrong color
              bug on some DirectColor xwds.

              xwdtopnm: Correct bug with 24/32 DirectColor LSBfirst xwds.

              Add pXmcheck() library function.

              Add leaftoppm and ppmtoleaf.  Thanks Bill O'Donnell.

              Add winicontoppm and ppmtowinicon.  Thanks Lee Benfield.

              Add pgmslice.  Thanks to Jos Dingjan.
              
              Include subset of RLE library in the package.

              stamp-date doesn't rely on whoami.

              Make file fixes to accomodate more install programs.
         
              Replace tmpnam() with mkstemp().

              Add pXm_init() into all programs that didn't have it.

00.05.15 BJH  Release 9.2

              Shared libraries now build properly for Solaris, SunOS, NetBSD.

              Add jbigtopnm, pnmtojbig.  Thanks to Markus Kuhn.

              Add pnminterp, pnminterp-gen by Russell Marks.

              Add pbm_writepbmrow_packed() and pbm_readpbmrow_packed() to
              libpbm.

              ppmdither: fix bug with input maxval != 255.  Make output
              maxval the LCM of the requested numbers of primary levels.

              xwdtopnm: works with files where there aren't an integeral
              number of pixels per storage unit (e.g. 24 bits per pixel)
              
              Add some missing pXm_init()

              Make pXmmerge source code automatically generated.

00.05.06 BJH  Release 9.1

              Add pbmtoppa (renamed from pbm2ppa, renamed from print-pbm).
              Thanks Tim Norman.

              Add pbmpage.  Thanks Tim Norman.

              Add pbmtomda, mdatopbm.  Thanks John Elliott.

              Replace gemtopbm with gemtopnm.  Thanks to John Elliott.

              Add ppmntsc: change colors to those acceptable for ntsc or pal.

              Rename old ppmntsc to ppmtv.

              pbmtolj: Add compression (-delta, -packbits, -compress) by
              Dave Platt

              Look for both /usr/lib/X11/rgb.txt and /usr/openwin/lib/rgb.txt
              by default.  Improved error messages if file not found.

              pbmtext: renders character codes 0x80-0xff and 0x00-0x1f as
              whatever the font says, rather than always blank.  Thanks
              Helge Oldach.

              Fix bug in parsing of rgb.txt file in ppm_colorname().

              Add optional static library build to make files.

              Fix a bunch of build bugs for Solaris, SunOS.  Still not all 
              the way there.  Thanks Richard Curnow, Philippe Brieu, 
              Benjamin Kuit.

              Make it build on Cygwin.  Thanks Pierre Humblet.

              Use rm -f;ls instead of ls -sf in make files; some systems don't
              have ln -f.
              
00.04.15 BJH  Release 9.0

              Add the 16-bit-per-sample format for maxval > 255.
              Change size of samples in the library interface from 8
              bits to 32 bits.  Library write routines now create the
              new 16 bit format instead of plain format when you
              request a maxval > 255 and not 'forceplain'.  Make all
              programs read the new format, and all programs that
              convert to PNM from a >8 bit input generate it instead
              of failing or normalizing.  Make pnmdepth generate it.

              pnm_readpnminit(), etc. fails if you request a maxval >
              65535 and not 'forceplain'.  It used to generate plain
              format in that case, but you couldn't actually specify    
              a sample value > 255.

              Add pnmtorle and rletopnm from the Army High Performance 
              Computing Research Center.

              add ppmcolormask - creates a mask of areas of a certain 
              color in an image.

              anytopnm: fix infinite loop
              
              pbmtext:  Ignore non-8-bit characters in bdf files instead
              of crashing.

              ppmdither: fix crash with large dithering matrix dimensions.

              Rename ppmtompeg/headers/search.h to motion_search.h to avoid
              possible confusion with the OSF system file search.h
         
              Fix erroneous shhopt.h dependency in build.
              
00.04.03 BJH  Release 8.4

              Add ppmtompeg, adapted from Berkeley's mpeg_encode.
         
              Add eyuvtoppm and ppmtoeyuv, and vidtoppm, from Berkeley
              mpeg tools.

              Add ppmfade, adapted from Wesley C. Barris' pbmfade. 

              Add ability to extract the alpha channel to tifftopnm,
              tgatoppm, and ximtoppm.  (It's already in pngtoppm,
              and still missing from ilbmtoppm).

              pnmtotiff: Change default compression to none, due to
              removal of LZW capability from Tiff library.

              Make merge build use symbolic links instead of hard links.

              Include dependent libraries in the link of the
              libraries.  This is necessary on some systems, and a
              good idea on others.

              Use strerror() instead of sys_errlist[] everywhere.  If
              some systems do not have the former, we need to do some
              work, because strerror() was already used in some
              places.  We do have a report of a BeOS system with no
              sys_errlist[].

00.03.24 BJH  Release 8.3

              Add pnmshadow, by John Walker <http://www.fourmilab.ch/>,
              dated 1997.08.15.

              Add ppmlabel, by John Walker, dated June 1995.

              Add ppmcie by John Walker, dated September 1994.

              Add character drawing routines by John Walker to libppm.

              Add sbigtopgm by John Walker, dated January 1998.

              Handle BMP file color map size parameter in ppmtobmp, bmptoppm.
              Thanks Marc Moorcroft.

              Rewrite make files, fix lots of make install bugs.

00.03.20 BJH  Release 8.2

              Add ppmtojpeg and jpegtopnm.

              Rename pnmnoraw to pnmtoplainpnm.

              Add CMYK capability to tifftopnm.
 
              Major make file rewrite, especially making install work.
              Pnmmerge is no longer the default.  Shared libraries are.
 
              Add pnmtotiffcmyk.  Written by Andrew Cooke  (Jara Software)
              jara@andrewcooke.free-online.co.uk

00.03.02 BJH  Release 8.1

00.03.02 BJH  Add pnmtopng and pngtopnm.  I got these from 
              ftp://ftp.au.netbsd.org/pub/NetBSD/packages/distfiles
              today.  Release 2.37.3.  I added an "unsigned" and
              changed the type of 'scaleval' to quiet compiler warnings.

00.03.01 BJH  Fix xwdtopnm interpretation of 16 bit TrueColor files.
              Thanks to Martin Kroeker, mk@daveg.com.

99.09.23 BJH  Update xbmtopbm to recognize newer xbm format.




CHANGES TO NETPBM THROUGH MARCH 1994
------------------------------------

Functional changes to Netpbm since 13 October 1993.
Minor bug fixes and compatibility fixes are not documented in this file.

PBM

libpbm1.c	strstr() added to libpbm1.c.
libpbm5.c	BDF font support added.
pbmtext		BDF font support added.
pbmto4425	New filter.
pbmtoln03	Command line parsing changed to Pbmplus standard.


PGM

pgmnoise	New filter.


PPM

picttoppm	Updated
ppm3d		New facility.
ppmchange	New filter.
ppmdim		New filter.
ppmflash	New filter.
ppmmix		New filter.
ppmntsc		New filter.
ppmqvga		Option parsing changed to Pbmplus standard.
ppmshift	New filter.
ppmspread	New filter.
ppmtoxpm	Prototypes added.
xpmtoppm	Prototypes added.
ilbmtoppm	Updated.
ppmtoilbm	Updated.


PNM

pnmtoddif	New filter.
pnmhistmap	New facility.
pnmtops		New option (-nocenter) added.


Functional changes to Netpbm since 7 December 1993.
Minor bug fixes and compatibility fixes are not documented in this file.

PGM

asciitopgm	New filter.
fitstopgm	Replaced by fitstopnm.
pgmtofits	Replaced by pnmtofits.
pgmtopbm	Upgraded.
pgmkernel	New filter.

PPM

ppmchange	Upgraded.
xvminitoppm	New filter.

PNM

pnmalias	New filter.
pnmtofits	Replacement for pgmtofits.
fitstopnm	Replacement for fitstopgm.
pnmtosgi	New filter.
sgitopnm	New filter.
pstopnm		New filter.



CHANGES BETWEEN PBMPLUS AND THE ORIGINAL NETPBM
-----------------------------------------------

The following is new in Netpbm (compared to Pbmplus):

PBM

pbmtext		BDF font support added.

pbmto4425	Display on an AT&T 4425 Ascii terminal.

pbmtoascii	A new improved version.

pbmtoln03	Convert to DEC LN03+.

pbmtolps	Fast PostScript creator.

pbmtopk		Conversion to/from a packed (PK) format font.
pktopbm

pbmclean	Flip isolated pixels.

pbmpscale	Enlarge pbm image with edge smoothing.


PGM

asciitopgm	Convert an ascii image into pgm.

pbmtopgm	Convert pbm to pgm by averaging areas.

rawtopgm	Handles input files without specification of the file size,
		assuming the input image is quadratic. It also supports a
		-tb (top bottom flip) option.

bioradtopgm	Conversion utility for files created by Biorad confocal
		microscopes.

spottopgm	Convert SPOT satellite images to pgm.

pgmkernel	Generate a convolution kernel.

pgmnoise	Create a pgm file with random pixels.


PPM

bmptoppm	Conversion to/from windows bitmap format.
ppmtobmp

ppmtogif	Updated version.
giftoppm	Removed (see giftopnm).

ppmtoilbm	Updated version.
ilbmtoppm

picttoppm	Updated version.
ppmtopict

ppmtoxpm	Updated version, which supports xpm version 3.
xpmtoppm

ppmtomap	Extract all colours from a ppm file.

ppmtomitsu	Convert to Mitsubishi S340-10 printer format.

xvminitoppm	Convert an XV thumbnail picture to ppm.

ppmtoyuvsplit	Conversion to/from YUV triplets. (MPEG / JPEG).
yuvsplittoppm

ppm3d		Create a red/blue stereo image.

ppmbrighten	Change image saturation and value on an HSV map.

ppmchange	Change all pixels of one colour to another in a portable pixmap

ppmdim		Dim a ppm file down to total blackness.

ppmdist		Simplistic grayscale assignment for machine generated
		colour images.

ppmflash	Brighten a picture up to complete white-out

ppmmix		Blend together two portable pixmaps.

ppmnorm		Normalize the contrast in a portable pixmap.

ppmntsc		Make a portable pixmap look like taken from an American TV.

ppmqvga		Eight plane quantization.

ppmshift	Shift lines of a portable pixmap left or right by a random amount.

ppmspread	Displace a portable pixmap's pixels by a random amount.

ppmtopjxl	Convert a ppm file into an HP PaintJet XL PCL file.


PNM

pnmtops		New option (-nocenter) added.

pnmtofits	Replacement for pgmtofits/fitstopgm
fitstopnm

pnmtosgi	Conversion to/from sgi image format.
sgitopnm

pnmtosir	Conversion to/from Solitaire image recorder format.
sirtopnm

giftopnm	Replaces giftoppm. Examines the input image and produces
		a pbm, pgm, or ppm output.

pstopnm		Convert PostScript to pnm. Requires Ghostscript.

zeisstopnm	Conversion utility for files created by Zeiss confocal
		microscopes (the old standard).

pnmalias	Anti aliasing filter.

pnmcomp		Composite two portable anymaps together.

pnmcrop		New options added.

pnmpad		Add borders to anymap.


LIBTIFF

A new release of libtiff is included. Please read its supporting
documentation.


CHANGE LOG FROM PBMPLUS
-----------------------

Changes since the 30oct91 patch version:

    Fixed uninitialized variable in ppmtotga.  (John Walker)
    Added pgmcrater, ppmforge, ppmtoacad, sldtoppm.  (John Walker)
    Slight change to the p?mmerge.c front-ends to allow for main programs
      that return instead of exitting.
    Minor clarifications to the pnmconvol man page.
    Fixed xwdtopnm to read some 16-bit True/Direct files. (David Elliott)
    Fixed uninitialized variables in pnmtotiff.  (Larry Rosenstein, Bayles Holt)
    Added a couple of checks for \r while reading whitespace. (Larry Rosenstein)
    Removed all the BROKENPUTC stuff.  Now we ignore all return values from
      putc(), and check ferror() in pm_close().  Added pm_close() calls to
      many of the filters.
    Fixed pnmdepth to check for too-large newmaxvals.  Improved rounding
      in pnmdepth and PPM_DEPTH macro.  (Tom Lane)
    Minor fix to ppmtouil.  (Mohsen Banan)
    Added new Imakefiles.  (Rainer Klute)

Changes since the 05oct91 X11R5 contrib tape version:

    Fixed minor SysV config error in pbmplus.h.  (Tom Lane)
    Fixed tifftopnm so that BITSPERSAMPLE and SAMPLESPERPIXEL default
      correctly.  Fixed possible bug in tgatoppm line-interleaving code.
      (Arthur David Olson)
    Fixed tifftopnm so that colormapped files are read correctly.
      (PauL Drews, Mike Wade)
    Corrected use of DefaultRGBDatabase / RGB_DB for imake sites.
      (Randal L. Schwartz)
    Bugfix to pnmtops color PostScript in -rle mode.  (Angus Duggan)
    Added auto-turning to pnmtops.
    Added run-length encoding to ppmtotga.
    Space optimization to pgmoil.

Changes since the 27sep91 comp.sources.misc distribution:

    Fixed spelling error in giftoppm.  Fixed ppmrelief to not shrink the
      image by 2 rows and columns.  Minor fix to pgmramp.  Fixed off-by-one
      error in pnmtoxwd.  Man page fix for pnmgamma.  (Arthur David Olson)
    Converted ANSI trigraphs in ppmtosixel into good old octal.  (Jeff Glover)
    Fix to 24/32 bit case in rasttopnm.  (Behr de Ruiter)
    Float/double portability fix to libppm4.  (Bruce Holmer, Ronald Khoo)
    Fixed typo in compat.ksh.  (Larry Virden)
    Fixed int/short incompatibility in tifftopnm.  (Salik Rafiq)

Changes during the extended beta test period, starting on 15jan91:

    Lots of fixes from: Anthony A. Datri, Arthur David Olson, David Brooks,
      David Elliott, Doug Claar, Duncan Sinclair, Francois Pinard, Gerard
      Leurs, Jim Hanko, Ken Laprade, Klaus U. Schallhorn, Markus Bolz, Mike
      Hench, Philip Gladstone, R C Smith, Selden E. Ball, Jr., Stephen Uitti,
      Steve Allen, Tom Lane, update.kpj-jaakkola@athena.dsv.su.se,
      Charles Karney, Unmesh Agarwala, Ed Pendzik, Juha Sarlin, Tom Tulinsky,
      Phillip Smith, Lai-King Mau, David Koblas, Mark Donovan.
    Added a global -version flag.
    Added bunches of statics and prototypes.  Now compiles with zero
      warnings under gcc -ansi -pedantic.
    Changed #ifdef __STDC__ to #if __STDC__, since some non-compliant
      compilers define it as 0.
    Changed pm_message and pm_error to be varargs routines.  Added a
      portable version of vfprintf for those systems which don't have it.
    Removed the option of not compiling the pgm and ppm parts.  Very few
      people used it, and it added amazing complexity to the pnm programs,
      turning them into maintenance nightmares.
    Merged pbmpaste into pnmpaste.
    Merged pgmtops and ppmtops into pnmtops.
    Added auto-scaling and dpi / page size flags to pnmtops.
    Changed the interpretation of bits in pbmlife to conform with other
      tools.
    Changed xwdtopnm to ignore the pixel number in the xwd color structure.
    Added a -pseudodepth flag to pnmtoxwd.
    Updated tifftopnm for libtiff 2.4.
    Added many option flags to pnmtotiff.  (J.T. Conklin)
    Added support for X11R5's new color specifiers rgb: and rgbi:.
    Added pgmtexture.  (James Darrell McCauley)
    Added ppmtopj, pjtoppm, and ppmdither.  (Christos Zoulas)
    Added ppmtotga.  (Mark Shand)
    Added ppmtosixel.  (Rick Vinci)
    Added pbmtoatk and atktopbm.  (Bill Janssen)
    Added ppmtoyuv and yuvtoppm.  (Marc Boucher)
    Fixes to picttoppm.  (George Phillips)
    Added 24-bit support to ilbmtoppm.  (Mark Thompson)

Changes since the X.V11R4 / comp.sources.misc distribution of 22nov89:

    Added pgmramp, pgmedge, pgmtoppm, rgb3toppm, ppmtoxpm, pnmgamma,
      ximtoppm, pgmtofs, picttoppm, ppmtopict, ppmquantall, anytopnm,
      pi1toppm, ppmtopi1, sputoppm, spctoppm, pbmto10x, ppmtoicr, ppmmake,
      xpmtoppm, ppmtopuzz, ppmtouil, ybmtopbm, pbmtoybm, lispmtopgm,
      pgmtolispm, pbmtogem, pi3topbm, pbmtopi3, pbmtoepson, pbmtoplot,
      pbmtozinc, pbmtext, pnmnoraw, pnmmargin, pnmfile, pnmindex,
      ppmtorgb3, gouldtoppm, pgmbentley, pgmoil, ppmrelief, pnmtotiff,
      ppmtopcx.
    Merged some filters:
      rasttopbm and rasttoppm into rasttopnm;
      pbmtorast and ppmtorast into pnmtorast;
      xwdtopbm and xwdtoppm into xwdtopnm;
      pbmtoxwd and ppmtoxwd into pnmtoxwd.
    Promoted some filters:
      pcxtopbm to pcxtoppm;
      ppmarith to pnmarith;
      ppmconvol to pnmconvol;
      ppmcscale to pnmdepth;
      ppmrotate to pnmrotate;
      ppmscale to pnmscale;
      ppmshear to pnmshear;
      ppmsmooth to pnmsmooth;
      tifftopgm to tifftopnm - new version based on Sam Leffler's libtiff.
    Bugfixes to pbmtoicon, ppmtops.
    The Makefiles now have a "merge" option.
    All flags are now case-insensitive.
    Added $(MAKE) stuff to Makefile.
    Changed pnmsmooth from a csh script to a sh script.
    Made macro use in pbmtox10bm and pbmtoxbm more portable.
    Moved compataliases to compat.csh, and added compat.ksh.
    Made ppmtoilbm less Amiga-specific.
    Added -headerskip and -rowskip flags to rawtopgm.
    Enhanced rasttopnm to interpret 8-bit rasters with no colormap as grayscale.
    Changed sscanf %g to %f - some systems can't handle %g on input.
    Added -expand flag to pbmmask.
    Speedup to pnmflip - don't buffer if possible.
    Added color-name-to-value routine to ppm - uses X11's rgb.txt if present.
    Updated Imakefile support to reflect X.V11R4.
    Removed picttopbm.
    Improved pnmcut argument syntax so that negative coords work like pnmpaste.
    Added "magic" file, for use with the "file" program.
    40% speedup for pgmnorm from Robert Stockton (rgs@cs.cmu.edu).
    Fixed long-standing bug involving colormaps on SPARCstations when
      compiled with gcc -- had to do with passing structs by value.
    Removed the -x flag from pnmtorast -- it's not really needed.
    Fixed subtle bug in the pnm reading code that caused pnmcat to blow
      it on images that differed greatly in width or height.
    New version of giftoppm that handles the GIF89a standard, and doesn't
      use fseek.
    Fixed fitstopgm to handle three-axis images, such as the Hubble pix.
    Xwdtopnm and pnmtoxwd finally handle byte-order properly.
    Added -xysize flag to pnmscale.
    Added conditional ANSI function prototypes to library routines.
    Added -noantialias flag to pnmrotate and pnmshear.
    Removed the TIPS file.  No one ever sent in any new tips, so I just
      moved the few I had into the relevant man pages.  That's probably
      where they belonged in the first place.
    Added justification flags to pnmcat.
    Added -map flag to ppmquant - user-specifiable colormap.  Also, the
      Floyd-Steinberg error diffusion finally works right.
    Added -map flag to pgmtoppm.
    Added DirectColor support to xwdtopnm and pnmtoxwd.
    Speedup to pgmtolj from Arthur David Olson: avoid sending whitespace.
    Fix to pbmtogo from Bo Thide': 2D compression now works.

Patch 1 to the X.V11R4 / comp.sources.misc distribution of 22nov89:

    Fixed bug in pgmtops -rle.

Changes since the alt.sources distribution of 13sep89:

    Small corrections to ppmtorast, pgmtops.
    Moved pbm/tifftopbm to pgm/tifftopgm - it now handles grayscale TIFF files.
    Fixed tifftopgm to handle non-native byte order.
    Changes to tifftopgm to handle bogus AppleScan TIFF files, to have
      better command syntax, and to use stdio.
    Optimizations to xbmtopbm, pbmtoxbm, and pbmtox10bm, courtesy of
      Juha Sarlin, to make them go about three times as fast.
    Optimization to pgmtops and ppmtops to make them go three times as fast.
    Optimization to pnmcrop.
    Added PBMPLUS_BROKENPUTC defines in pbmplus.h to handle systems (such as
      ULTRIX) which have broken putc() macros.
    Rewrote ppmscale, pnmcat, and pgmhist to operate line-by-line, instead
      of reading in the whole image.
    Rewrote pnmflip to keep only one copy of the image in memory.
    Added pgmtofits, courtesy of Wilson H. Bent, plus bugfixes to fitstopgm
      and a patch to giftoppm to handle black&white GIF files.
    Added picttopbm and rawtopgm.
    Fixes to xwdtoppm and ppmtoxwd so they compile with SunOS cc as well as gcc.
    Another small change to ppmtoxwd having to do with colormap size.
    Changed macptopbm's -headersize flag to be -extraskip.
    Changed tgatoppm to read color values as BGRA instead of ARGB; the Targa
      documentation is apparently wrong about the order.
    Some changes to the Makefiles, partially to work around bugs in gnumake.
    Got g3topbm working, and added pbmtog3, courtesy of Paul Haeberli.
    Added some pixrect work-alike code so that rasttopbm, pbmtorast, rasttoppm,
      and ppmtorast can be used on non-Sun systems.  This also provides a
      final solution to the persistent byte- and bit-order problems on 386's.
    Moved the SYSV-checking #ifdefs to *after* the include of pbm.h, which
      defines SYSV.
    Made all the #else's and #endif's ANSI-compliant.
    Added manual pages for libpbm, libpgm, libppm, and libpnm, courtesy
      of Tony Hansen.
    Changed man page installation so that pages from different sections
      can go in different directories.
    Fixed Imakefiles.

Changes since the expo.lcs.mit.edu FTP distribution of 06sep89:

    Added #ifdefs to pnm/libpnm3.c to allow the PBM-PNM-only configuration.
    Small corrections to TIPS, pnm/Makefile, pnm/Imakefile, ppm/ppmrotate.1,
      ppm/ppmshear.1, ppm/ppmtoilbm.c, pbm/xwdtopbm.c, ppm/xwdtoppm.c,
      ppm/ppmtoxwd.c, ppm/ppmtoxwd.1, pbm/x11wd.h.

Changes since the comp.sources.misc distribution of 31oct88:

    Added pbmreduce, pbmlife, pbmmask, and pbmupc.
    Added gemtopbm, tifftopbm, pcxtopbm, pbmtogo, mgrtopbm, pbmtomgr,
      cmuwmtopbm, pbmtocmuwm, g3topbm, and pbmtobg.
    Minor bugfix to pbmtolj.
    Slight restructuring of most of the programs to use vastly less memory.
    Various other minor optimizations.
    Fixed pbmtorast and rasttopbm to handle byte-swapped big-endian 386 boxes.
    Slight changes to argument syntax of pbmcrop, pbmmake, pbmreduce.
    Moved to the new PGM package: pbmtops (which now produces Conforming PS).
    Moved to the new PPM package: giftopbm.
    Moved to the new PNM package: pbmcrop pbmcut pbmenlarge pbminvert.
    Consolidated into a single pnmflip tool: pbmfliplr pbmfliptb pbmtrnspos.
    Consolidated into a single pnmcat tool: pbmcatlr pbmcattb.
    Added compataliases script for upward compatability with changed tools.
    Removed xxxtopbm.
    Added a -headersize flag to macptopbm, to help get around annoying
      problems in MacPaint file format.
    Added the RAWBITS compilation-time option, to use a more compact and
      much faster (but less portable) external format.
    Removed the CBM format - use compress(1) and / or RAWBITS instead.
    Pbmpaste (and the new pnmpaste) now accepts negative x and y coords,
      which are interpreted relative to the right and bottom sides.
    Changed all programs to accept a "-" file argument as meaning standard
      input.
    Removed pbmtox10wd, since it was never very useful (X10 doesn't have xwud).
    Added Imakefiles, for X11 types to use.

Changes since the X.V11R3 distribution of 31aug88:

    The cbm format has been revised to support run-length encoding.
    Pbmtops now does run-length encoding.

Major changes since the X.V11R2 distribution of 28mar88:

    The pbm format now has a "magic number".
    New conversion filters: brushtopbm, giftopbm, pbmtolj, pbmtomacp,
      pbmtoxwd, and pbmtox10wd.
    Icontopbm converter has a better parser -- it knows to skip over
      any extraneous comments at the beginning of the icon file.
    Pbmtops generates a different PostScript wrapper program -- it should
      handle huge bitmaps better.
    Xwdtopbm now handles byte-swapping correctly.
    Pbmmake takes a flag to specify the color of the new bitmap.
    Pbmpaste now implements 'or', 'and', and 'xor' operations as well
      as the default 'replace'.
